posts/2022-04-01-cloud-native-liberty-buildpack.adoc, before:

---
layout: post
title: "Introducing the Paketo Liberty Buildpack"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/kevin-ortega
author_github: https://github.com/kevin-ortega
seo-title: Introducing a new method to deploy your cloud native application to any cloud - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: Use Paketo Buildpacks to easily build your apps and keep them updated. Buildpacks transform your application source code into container images without creating a Dockerfile!
blog_description: "Use Paketo Buildpacks to easily build your apps and keep them updated. Buildpacks transform your application source code into container images without creating a Dockerfile!"
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
additional_authors:
- name: Hank Ibell
  github: https://github.com/hwibell
  image: https://avatars0.githubusercontent.com/hwibell
---
= Introducing the Paketo Liberty Buildpack
Kevin Ortega <https://github.com/kevin-ortega>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

// // // // // // // //
// In the preceding section:
// Do not insert any blank lines between any of the lines.
//
// "open-graph-image" is set to OL logo. Whenever possible update this to a more appriopriate/specific image (for example if present an image that is being used in the post).
// However, it can be left empty which will set it to the default
//
// Replace TITLE with the blog post title
//
// Replace SECOND_AUTHOR_NAME with the name of the second author.
// Replace SECOND_GITHUB_USERNAME with the GitHub user name of the second author.
// Replace THIRD_AUTHOR_NAME with the name of the third author. And so on for fourth, fifth, etc authors.
// Replace THIRD_GITHUB_USERNAME with the GitHub user name of the third author. And so on for fourth, fifth, etc authors.
//
// Replace AUTHOR_NAME with your name as first author.
// Replace GITHUB_USERNAME with your GitHub username eg: lauracowen
// Replace DESCRIPTION with a short summary (~60 words) of the release (a more succinct version of the first paragraph of the post).
//
// Replace AUTHOR_NAME with your name as you'd like it to be displayed, eg: Laura Cowen
//
// Example post: 2020-02-12-faster-startup-Java-applications-criu.adoc
//
// If adding image into the post add :
// -------------------------
// [.img_border_light]
// image::img/blog/FILE_NAME[IMAGE CAPTION ,width=70%,align="center"]
// -------------------------
// "[.img_border_light]" = This adds a faint grey border around the image to make its edges sharper. Use it around
// screenshots but not around diagrams. Then double check how it looks.
// There is also a "[.img_border_dark]" class which tends to work best with screenshots that are taken on dark backgrounds.
// Once again make sure to double check how it looks
// Change "FILE_NAME" to the name of the image file. Also make sure to put the image into the right folder which is: img/blog
// change the "IMAGE CAPTION" to a couple words of what the image is
// // // // // // // //

link:https://paketo.io/[Paketo buildpacks] transform your application source code into container images and easily keep them updated.

== What is a buildpack?

A buildpack is a set of executables that inspects your application source code and creates a plan to build your application.

Paketo buildpacks implement the link:https://buildpacks.io[Cloud Native Computing Foundation] buildpack specification to provide toolkits and workflows for building reproducible container images from source code.

The link:https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/liberty[Paketo Liberty buildpack] provides the Open Liberty runtime to a workflow that produces an Open Container Initiative (OCI) image that can run just about anywhere.

== Why use the Paketo Liberty buildpack?

* You can build your application without creating a Dockerfile!
* Advanced Caching: Paketo buildpacks use built-in caching to improve performance so you can quickly rebuild your application by updating only the layers that have changed.
* Bill-of-Materials: a built-in software bill of materials (SBOM) support provides insights into the contents of the application image.
* Minimal Application Image: images contain only what is necessary.
* Reproducibility: reproduce the same application image digest by re-running the build.
* Auto-detection: images are built directly from application source.
* Rebasing: instantly update base images without rebuilding your source code by patching the OS layer of your image.

== What do you need?
* Your application source

* link:https://hub.docker.com/search?type=edition&offering=community[Docker]

* The link:https://buildpacks.io/docs/tools/pack/[pack CLI]

== Let's get started!
The following examples use the link:/blog/2021/08/20/open-liberty-starter.html[Open Liberty starter] application as the application source.
Download the Open Liberty starter application:
[source]
git clone https://github.com/openliberty/guide-getting-started.git
cd guide-getting-started/finish

Set a default builder:
[source]
pack config default-builder paketobuildpacks/builder-jammy-base

Create `project.toml` file in the finish directory with the following content:
[source]
----
[[build.env]]
    name = "BP_JAVA_APP_SERVER"
    value = "liberty"

[[build.env]]
    name = "BP_MAVEN_BUILT_ARTIFACT"
    value ="target/*.[ejw]ar src/main/liberty/config/*"

[[build.buildpacks]]
  uri = "docker://gcr.io/paketo-buildpacks/eclipse-openj9"

[[build.buildpacks]]
  uri = "docker://gcr.io/paketo-buildpacks/java"
----
Build the application on Liberty with IBM Semeru OpenJ9 and required Liberty features:
[source]
 pack build myapp

Your application is now transformed into an OCI image!

== Now what?
With your OCI image, you can run your application locally with the `docker run` command.

Now run your application:
[source]
docker run --rm -p 9080:9080 myapp

or deploy your application to any Kubernetes-based platform, such as link:https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/cloud-computing/openshift[Red Hat OpenShift], by using an link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty-operator[Open Liberty operator]

== Build your app from an on-prem Open Liberty installation
You can build from an on-prem Open Liberty installation by using a packaged Liberty server. Run the following command to package your server.
[source]
bin/server package defaultServer --include=usr

You can then supply the packaged server to the build by using the `--path` argument:
[source]
pack build --path <packaged-server-zip-path> \
 --buildpack paketo-buildpacks/eclipse-openj9 \
 --buildpack paketo-buildpacks/java myapp

Alternatively, you can build from a Liberty server installation by changing your working directory to the installation root that contains the `wlp` directory and running the following command:
[source]
pack build \
 --buildpack paketo-buildpacks/eclipse-openj9 \
 --buildpack paketo-buildpacks/java myapp

Learn more:

* link:https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/liberty/blob/main/README.md[Cloud native Liberty buildpack]
* link:https://buildpacks.io[Cloud native buildpacks]
* link:https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/liberty/blob/main/docs/using-liberty-stack.md[Create a UBI-based container image]

// // // // // // // //
// LINKS
//
// OpenLiberty.io site links:
// link:/guides/microprofile-rest-client.html[Consuming RESTful Java microservices]
//
// Off-site links:
// link:https://openapi-generator.tech/docs/installation#jar[Download Instructions]
//
// // // // // // // //

Commit message:

Adding sidebar note for restricted use on  M1 and M2 macbooks

posts/2022-04-01-cloud-native-liberty-buildpack.adoc, after:

---
layout: post
title: "Introducing the Paketo Liberty Buildpack"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/kevin-ortega
author_github: https://github.com/kevin-ortega
seo-title: Introducing a new method to deploy your cloud native application to any cloud - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: Use Paketo Buildpacks to easily build your apps and keep them updated. Buildpacks transform your application source code into container images without creating a Dockerfile!
blog_description: "Use Paketo Buildpacks to easily build your apps and keep them updated. Buildpacks transform your application source code into container images without creating a Dockerfile!"
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
additional_authors:
- name: Hank Ibell
  github: https://github.com/hwibell
  image: https://avatars0.githubusercontent.com/hwibell
---
= Introducing the Paketo Liberty Buildpack
Kevin Ortega <https://github.com/kevin-ortega>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

// // // // // // // //
// In the preceding section:
// Do not insert any blank lines between any of the lines.
//
// "open-graph-image" is set to OL logo. Whenever possible update this to a more appriopriate/specific image (for example if present an image that is being used in the post).
// However, it can be left empty which will set it to the default
//
// Replace TITLE with the blog post title
//
// Replace SECOND_AUTHOR_NAME with the name of the second author.
// Replace SECOND_GITHUB_USERNAME with the GitHub user name of the second author.
// Replace THIRD_AUTHOR_NAME with the name of the third author. And so on for fourth, fifth, etc authors.
// Replace THIRD_GITHUB_USERNAME with the GitHub user name of the third author. And so on for fourth, fifth, etc authors.
//
// Replace AUTHOR_NAME with your name as first author.
// Replace GITHUB_USERNAME with your GitHub username eg: lauracowen
// Replace DESCRIPTION with a short summary (~60 words) of the release (a more succinct version of the first paragraph of the post).
//
// Replace AUTHOR_NAME with your name as you'd like it to be displayed, eg: Laura Cowen
//
// Example post: 2020-02-12-faster-startup-Java-applications-criu.adoc
//
// If adding image into the post add :
// -------------------------
// [.img_border_light]
// image::img/blog/FILE_NAME[IMAGE CAPTION ,width=70%,align="center"]
// -------------------------
// "[.img_border_light]" = This adds a faint grey border around the image to make its edges sharper. Use it around
// screenshots but not around diagrams. Then double check how it looks.
// There is also a "[.img_border_dark]" class which tends to work best with screenshots that are taken on dark backgrounds.
// Once again make sure to double check how it looks
// Change "FILE_NAME" to the name of the image file. Also make sure to put the image into the right folder which is: img/blog
// change the "IMAGE CAPTION" to a couple words of what the image is
// // // // // // // //

link:https://paketo.io/[Paketo buildpacks] transform your application source code into container images and easily keep them updated.

== What is a buildpack?

A buildpack is a set of executables that inspects your application source code and creates a plan to build your application.

Paketo buildpacks implement the link:https://buildpacks.io[Cloud Native Computing Foundation] buildpack specification to provide toolkits and workflows for building reproducible container images from source code.

The link:https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/liberty[Paketo Liberty buildpack] provides the Open Liberty runtime to a workflow that produces an Open Container Initiative (OCI) image that can run just about anywhere.

== Why use the Paketo Liberty buildpack?

* You can build your application without creating a Dockerfile!
* Advanced Caching: Paketo buildpacks use built-in caching to improve performance so you can quickly rebuild your application by updating only the layers that have changed.
* Bill-of-Materials: a built-in software bill of materials (SBOM) support provides insights into the contents of the application image.
* Minimal Application Image: images contain only what is necessary.
* Reproducibility: reproduce the same application image digest by re-running the build.
* Auto-detection: images are built directly from application source.
* Rebasing: instantly update base images without rebuilding your source code by patching the OS layer of your image.

== What do you need?
* Your application source

* link:https://hub.docker.com/search?type=edition&offering=community[Docker]

* The link:https://buildpacks.io/docs/tools/pack/[pack CLI]

== Let's get started!
The following examples use the link:/blog/2021/08/20/open-liberty-starter.html[Open Liberty starter] application as the application source.

[sidebar]
__Please note that currently Paketo buildpacks cannot be used locally on
machines running with an M1 or M2 processors – see this link:https://www.cloudfoundry.org/blog/arm64-paketo-buildpacks/[blog] for further details.__


Download the Open Liberty starter application:
[source]
git clone https://github.com/openliberty/guide-getting-started.git
cd guide-getting-started/finish

Set a default builder:
[source]
pack config default-builder paketobuildpacks/builder-jammy-base

Create `project.toml` file in the finish directory with the following content:
[source]
----
[[build.env]]
    name = "BP_JAVA_APP_SERVER"
    value = "liberty"

[[build.env]]
    name = "BP_MAVEN_BUILT_ARTIFACT"
    value ="target/*.[ejw]ar src/main/liberty/config/*"

[[build.buildpacks]]
  uri = "docker://gcr.io/paketo-buildpacks/eclipse-openj9"

[[build.buildpacks]]
  uri = "docker://gcr.io/paketo-buildpacks/java"
----
Build the application on Liberty with IBM Semeru OpenJ9 and required Liberty features:
[source]
 pack build myapp

Your application is now transformed into an OCI image!

== Now what?
With your OCI image, you can run your application locally with the `docker run` command.

Now run your application:
[source]
docker run --rm -p 9080:9080 myapp

or deploy your application to any Kubernetes-based platform, such as link:https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/cloud-computing/openshift[Red Hat OpenShift], by using an link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty-operator[Open Liberty operator]

== Build your app from an on-prem Open Liberty installation
You can build from an on-prem Open Liberty installation by using a packaged Liberty server. Run the following command to package your server.
[source]
bin/server package defaultServer --include=usr

You can then supply the packaged server to the build by using the `--path` argument:
[source]
pack build --path <packaged-server-zip-path> \
 --buildpack paketo-buildpacks/eclipse-openj9 \
 --buildpack paketo-buildpacks/java myapp

Alternatively, you can build from a Liberty server installation by changing your working directory to the installation root that contains the `wlp` directory and running the following command:
[source]
pack build \
 --buildpack paketo-buildpacks/eclipse-openj9 \
 --buildpack paketo-buildpacks/java myapp

Learn more:

* link:https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/liberty/blob/main/README.md[Cloud native Liberty buildpack]
* link:https://buildpacks.io[Cloud native buildpacks]
* link:https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/liberty/blob/main/docs/using-liberty-stack.md[Create a UBI-based container image]

// // // // // // // //
// LINKS
//
// OpenLiberty.io site links:
// link:/guides/microprofile-rest-client.html[Consuming RESTful Java microservices]
//
// Off-site links:
// link:https://openapi-generator.tech/docs/installation#jar[Download Instructions]
//
// // // // // // // //
