posts/2022-09-19-app-server-crafters-makers.adoc, before:

---
layout: post
title: "TITLE"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/lauracowen
author_github: https://github.com/lauracowen
seo-title: TITLE - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: DESCRIPTION
blog_description: "DESCRIPTION"
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/blog/crafters-rug-mug-quilt.jpg
---
= Liberty application server crafters and makers
Laura Cowen <https://github.com/lauracowen>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.





== Early Liberty application server crafters and makers

Open Liberty was born in September 2017 when IBM released the source code of IBM Liberty (then known as WebSphere Liberty).
IBM Liberty celebrated its 10th birthday in June this year. Right from the start, it was intended to be a modular, lightweight runtime that is pleasing for developers to use and can be run almost anywhere.

Many of the early Liberty application server crafters and makers made use of Liberty's small footprint, which meant they could run it on even the earliest Raspberry Pi's. That's just 700 Mhz of processing power and 256 MB of memory for our link:https://youtu.be/rH_SmgmyVUo[earliest Liberty-on-Pi project] in 2012 (see link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raspberry_Pi#Raspberry_Pi[specs on Wikipedia]).

=== Remote-controlled application server (2013)

The Liberty Car was a 

https://github.com/WASdev/skunkworks.libertycar

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-liberty-car.jpeg[Remote controlled car with embedded Arduino running Liberty,width=50%,align="center"]

Tom Banks, the Liberty Car's designer and maker, talks through how it works:
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/LnmjAUEhfX8" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>


=== Wearable application server (2013)

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-hollie-hat-jfokus.jpg[Hollie presenting in her chef's hat at JFokus,width=50%,align="center"]
(Photo taken by Kate Stanley.)

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-hollie-hat-debugging.jpg[Debugging a hat,align="center"]

Hollie talks about making her wearable application server:
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/OE5SLt7UlJk" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

=== Cuddly, throwable application server (2015)

link:https://hollycummins.com/about/[Hollie Cummins]

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-hollie-ball-qcon.JPG[Hollie about to throw her app server ball whilst presenting at QCon,width=50%,align="center"]

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-hollie-ball-ms.jpg[Close-up photo of Hollie's app server ball,width=50%,align="center"]

Watch link:https://www.infoq.com/presentations/arduino-app-server/[Hollie talk about her cuddly throwable application server].


== Open Liberty application server crafters and makers

After the birth of Open Liberty, its bright space-related branding lent itself well to pretty visuals and space-themed games.


=== Firing lazers in the Space Sentry game (2019)

Space Sentry was a game built by Prashanth Gunapalasingam and Frank Ji on Java microservices. Players controlled a lazer that was mounted on top of a 3D-printed spaceship to fire at 3D-printed targets. The movements were handled by Lego and Arduinos that communicated over Wi-Fi with three microservices running in Open Liberty containers on a Raspberry Pi.

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-spacesentry.png[Space Sentry spaceship and lazer,width=70%,align="center"]

The three microservices communicated with each other using REST APIs (JAX-RS and MicroProfile Rest Client), and used other MicroProfile features such as MicroProfile Config, MicroProfile Health, and MicroProfile Metrics to configure and monitor the services and to post results on the leaderboard.

Find out more about link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2022/02/16/space-sentry-challenge.html[the Space Sentry game] in Prashanth's blog post.


=== Racing spaceships game (year?)


*TODO*

3D printed spaceships - Martin/Mike


=== Avoiding asteroids in the Space Rover game (2022)

Space Rover is a shiny new game that has a Java microservices architecture and uses Jakarta EE 9.1 and MicroProfile 5.0 APIs. It has a physical board, made by Ellen Lau from wood and acrylic sheets with many LED lights to mark out the asteroids on the board and to give feedback when the Space Rover drives over the asteroid and when it completes the level. The Space Rover, made by Prashanth Gunapalasingam, is a 3D-printed spaceship running on a chasis with wheels and it rolls around the board in response to hand gestures captured by a webcam.

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-spacerover-gameboard-v2.png[Space Rover game board,width=50%,align="center"]
(Photo taken by the Space Rover team.)

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-spacerover-scoreboard.jpg[Space Rover scoreboard,width=50%,align="center"]

Space Rover's services make extensive use of web sockets to communicate between the components of the game (Jakarta WebSocket 2.0); REST endpoints and HTTP endpoints for communicating with the leaderboard and handling the game statistics (Jakarta JAX-RS 3.0); and interacting with the leaderboard database (Jakarta CDI 3.0).

MicroProfile technologies are used to check the status of the services and database (MicroProfile Health 4.0); to configure connections to different services and database (MicroProfile Config 3.0); to retry connection attempts to the database when there are problems (MicroProfile Fault Tolerance 4.0); to record JVM metrics on the Game service and track the latency of the Game service for the health check test (MicroProfile Metrics 3.0); to generate an HTTP client to send game end statistics to the leaderboard (MicroProfile Rest Client 3.0); and to provide REST API documentation and UI for demonstration (MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.0).

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-spacerover-architecture.png[Space Rover's microservices architecture,width=70%,align="center"]
(Diagram by the Space Rover team.)

The team, Ellen and Prashanth along with Jake de Vos, Jimmy Wu, and Malhar Shah, has already started taking Space Rover to conferences where they invite attendees to use hand gestures to drive the Space Rover around the board without running into asteroids.

You can find out more about link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/space-rover-mission#readme[their designs and architecture in GitHub].


=== Open Liberty patchwork quilted rug mug (2022)

Finally, an Open Liberty rug mug (big coaster) can brighten up your desk and provide somewhere to host your tea and biscuits (or your Java and cookies, if you prefer). There are currently no wires, chips, pi's, or LEDs in this mini quilt. If you want to make your own mug rug, you can find the template and some instructions in GitHub [ADD LINK].

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-rug-mug-quilt.jpg[Open Liberty logo rug mug with tea and biscuits,width=50%,align="center"]

---
All photos were taken by Laura Cowen unless otherwise noted.

Commit message:

Start adding text to Hollie's sections. And pic of cake.

posts/2022-09-19-app-server-crafters-makers.adoc, after:

---
layout: post
title: "TITLE"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/lauracowen
author_github: https://github.com/lauracowen
seo-title: TITLE - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: DESCRIPTION
blog_description: "DESCRIPTION"
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/blog/crafters-rug-mug-quilt.jpg
---
= Liberty application server crafters and makers
Laura Cowen <https://github.com/lauracowen>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

From the beginning, creative crafters and makers within the Liberty development team have been inspired to build projects that represent the Liberty application server in the physical world. Sometimes the projects incorporate and demonstrate Liberty Java technologies, such as Hollie's cuddly throwable application server, and sometimes they are just creations inspired by and celebrating Liberty itself.

In recognition of the Open Liberty project's 5th birthday this month, and the Liberty application server's 10th birthday earlier this year, we'll take a look back at some of the early projects from our Liberty application server crafters and makers, and at how the tradition has continued with more recent our Open Liberty crafters and makers.


== Early Liberty application server crafters and makers

Open Liberty was born in September 2017 when IBM released the source code of IBM Liberty (then known as WebSphere Liberty). IBM Liberty celebrated its 10th birthday in June this year. Right from the start, it was intended to be a modular, lightweight runtime that is pleasing for developers to use and can be run almost anywhere.

Many of the early Liberty application server crafters and makers made use of Liberty's small footprint, which meant they could run it on even the earliest Raspberry Pi's. The first release of the Raspberry Pi in 2012 was nicely timed for Liberty's first release in June 2012. The first Rasperry Pi had just link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raspberry_Pi#Raspberry_Pi[700 Mhz of processing power and 256 MB of memory], which was perfect for link:https://youtu.be/cBV4tgLgDwg[demonstrating how small Liberty could go]. Another project at that time demonstrated link:https://youtu.be/rH_SmgmyVUo[running Liberty and MQTT on a Raspberry Pi to remotely control a smart house 50 miles away].

Running Liberty on a very small computer sparked the imaginations of the team's crafters and makers.

=== Wearable application server (2013)

link:https://hollycummins.com/about/[Hollie Cummins], for example, came up with the unconventional idea of _wearing_ a Java application server as a hat. She sewed a Raspberry Pi into a chef's hat and installed Liberty on it. She then wore it in conferences presentations when talking about how *FINISH*

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-hollie-hat-jfokus.jpg[Hollie presenting in her chef's hat at JFokus,width=50%,align="center"]
(Photo taken by Kate Stanley.)

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-hollie-hat-debugging.jpg[Debugging a hat,align="center"]

Hollie talks about making her wearable application server:
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/OE5SLt7UlJk" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

=== Remote-controlled application server (2013)

The Liberty Car was a remote-controlled car 

https://github.com/WASdev/skunkworks.libertycar

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-liberty-car.jpeg[Remote controlled car with embedded Arduino running Liberty,width=50%,align="center"]

Tom Banks, the Liberty Car's designer and maker, talks through how it works:
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/LnmjAUEhfX8" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>


=== Cuddly throwable application server (2015)



[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-hollie-ball-qcon.JPG[Hollie about to throw her app server ball whilst presenting at QCon,width=50%,align="center"]

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-hollie-ball-ms.jpg[Close-up photo of Hollie's app server ball,width=50%,align="center"]

Watch link:https://www.infoq.com/presentations/arduino-app-server/[Hollie talk about her cuddly throwable application server].

=== Java EE 7 celebratory cake (2018)


[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-wasdev-cake.jpg[Java EE 7 cake,width=50%,align="center"]

== Open Liberty project crafters and makers

After the birth of Open Liberty, its bright space-related branding lent itself well to pretty visuals and space-themed games.


=== Firing lazers in the Space Sentry game (2019)

Space Sentry was a game built by Prashanth Gunapalasingam and Frank Ji on Java microservices. Players controlled a lazer that was mounted on top of a 3D-printed spaceship to fire at 3D-printed targets. The movements were handled by Lego and Arduinos that communicated over Wi-Fi with three microservices running in Open Liberty containers on a Raspberry Pi.

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-spacesentry.png[Space Sentry spaceship and lazer,width=70%,align="center"]

The three microservices communicated with each other using REST APIs (JAX-RS and MicroProfile Rest Client), and used other MicroProfile features such as MicroProfile Config, MicroProfile Health, and MicroProfile Metrics to configure and monitor the services and to post results on the leaderboard.

Find out more about link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2022/02/16/space-sentry-challenge.html[the Space Sentry game] in Prashanth's blog post.


=== Racing spaceships game (year?)


*TODO*

3D printed spaceships - Martin/Mike


=== Avoiding asteroids in the Space Rover game (2022)

Space Rover is a shiny new game that has a Java microservices architecture and uses Jakarta EE 9.1 and MicroProfile 5.0 APIs. It has a physical board, made by Ellen Lau from wood and acrylic sheets with many LED lights to mark out the asteroids on the board and to give feedback when the Space Rover drives over the asteroid and when it completes the level. The Space Rover, made by Prashanth Gunapalasingam, is a 3D-printed spaceship running on a chasis with wheels and it rolls around the board in response to hand gestures captured by a webcam.

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-spacerover-gameboard-v2.png[Space Rover game board,width=50%,align="center"]
(Photo taken by the Space Rover team.)

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-spacerover-scoreboard.jpg[Space Rover scoreboard,width=50%,align="center"]

Space Rover's services make extensive use of web sockets to communicate between the components of the game (Jakarta WebSocket 2.0); REST endpoints and HTTP endpoints for communicating with the leaderboard and handling the game statistics (Jakarta JAX-RS 3.0); and interacting with the leaderboard database (Jakarta CDI 3.0).

MicroProfile technologies are used to check the status of the services and database (MicroProfile Health 4.0); to configure connections to different services and database (MicroProfile Config 3.0); to retry connection attempts to the database when there are problems (MicroProfile Fault Tolerance 4.0); to record JVM metrics on the Game service and track the latency of the Game service for the health check test (MicroProfile Metrics 3.0); to generate an HTTP client to send game end statistics to the leaderboard (MicroProfile Rest Client 3.0); and to provide REST API documentation and UI for demonstration (MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.0).

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-spacerover-architecture.png[Space Rover's microservices architecture,width=70%,align="center"]
(Diagram by the Space Rover team.)

The team, Ellen and Prashanth along with Jake de Vos, Jimmy Wu, and Malhar Shah, has already started taking Space Rover to conferences where they invite attendees to use hand gestures to drive the Space Rover around the board without running into asteroids.

You can find out more about link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/space-rover-mission#readme[their designs and architecture in GitHub].


=== Open Liberty patchwork quilted rug mug (2022)

Finally, an Open Liberty rug mug (big coaster) can brighten up your desk and provide somewhere to host your tea and biscuits (or your Java and cookies, if you prefer). There are currently no wires, chips, pi's, or LEDs in this mini quilt. If you want to make your own mug rug, you can find the template and some instructions in GitHub [ADD LINK].

[.img_border_light]
image::img/blog/crafters-rug-mug-quilt.jpg[Open Liberty logo rug mug with tea and biscuits,width=50%,align="center"]

---
All photos were taken by Laura Cowen unless otherwise noted.
