posts/2023-02-20-aws-instant-on.adoc, before:

---
layout: post
title: "Liberty InstantOn on Amazon EKS"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/jgawor
author_github: https://github.com/jgawor
seo-title: Liberty InstantOn on Amazon EKS - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: Liberty InstantOn dramatically speeds up the startup time of Liberty applications. In this post, we will deploy a simple Liberty application to Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS) and use InstantOn to quickly spin up application containers.
blog_description: Liberty InstantOn dramatically speeds up the startup time of Liberty applications. In this post, we will deploy a simple Liberty application to Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS) and use InstantOn to quickly spin up application containers.
---
= Liberty InstantOn on Amazon EKS
Jarek Gawor <https://github.com/jgawor>

//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2023/02/10/instant-on-beta-update.html[Liberty InstantOn beta] dramatically improves the startup time of Liberty applications. In this post, we will deploy a simple Liberty application to link:https://aws.amazon.com/eks/[Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS)] and use InstantOn to quickly spin up application containers. 

First, we will build an InstantOn container image and push it to link:https://aws.amazon.com/ecr/[Amazon Elastic Container Registry (Amazon ECR)]. Next, we will create a new Amazon EKS cluster, deploy the Liberty application to the cluster, and scale the application up.

To complete the steps outlined in this post, you need the following resources:

* link:https://maven.apache.org/[Maven] to build the Liberty application
* link:https://podman.io/[Podman] to build the InstantOn image
* An link:https://aws.amazon.com/[Amazon AWS] Account
* The link:https://aws.amazon.com/cli/[AWS CLI] to create and manage AWS services
* The link:https://eksctl.io/[Amazon EKS CLI] (v0.120.0 or higher) to create and manage EKS clusters
* The link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl[kubectl] command-line tool to interact with a Kubernetes cluster


== Build the InstantOn image

First, clone the repository of the sample Liberty application. We are checking out the `instanton` branch, which contains the InstantOn modifications. 
```
git clone -b instanton https://github.com/OpenLiberty/sample-getting-started.git
cd sample-getting-started
```

Next, build the application code using Maven:
```
mvn install
```

Once the code is compiled, we can build the InstantOn container image. This process creates two container images:

* The base image, which contains only the application
* The InstantOn image, which extends the base image and adds the checkpoint data needed for a quick startup.  

NOTE: A small set of elevated Linux permissions are required to build the InstantOn container image. However, to simplify the example, the next few commands are run as the `root` user using the `sudo` command.

To build the base image, run:
```
sudo ./build-og.sh
```
The script runs a simple `podman build` command and creates the `dev.local/getting-started` container image.

To build the InstantOn image, run:
```
sudo ./build-instanton.sh
```
The scripts runs a sequence of `podman` commands that create the checkpoint data and save that data in a new `dev.local/getting-started-instanton` container image.

== Push the image to ECR

At this point, the InstantOn image on exists on a local machine. We need to push it to a container registry to make it available to the EKS cluster. One option is to make the image available in a public registry, such as link:https://hub.docker.com/[DockerHub] or link:https://quay.io[Quay]. Another option is to use Amazon ECR. 

In this post, we will use Amazon ECR for a couple of reasons. First, a default private Amazon ECR is provided with each AWS account, so we don't have to set up and configure a separate registry elsewhere. Second, Amazon ECR can seamlessly integrate with EKS and other similar AWS services such as link:https://aws.amazon.com/ecs/[Amazon ECS]. Therefore, we do not have to configure any image pull secrets in our EKS cluster to pull down images from the private container registry.

To use the private Amazon ECR registry, first create a repository for the InstantOn image:
```
aws ecr create-repository --repository-name getting-started-instanton
```

In the output of this command, note the `repositoryUri` value. It should match the `<aws_account_id>.dkr.ecr.<region>.amazonaws.com/getting-started-instanton` pattern. For example: `1234567890.dkr.ecr.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/getting-started-instanton`.  You will need this value when you create the `deployment.yaml` file to deploy the InstantOn application.

Next, authenticate to the registry using the following command so you can push or pull images using Podman:
```
aws ecr get-login-password | sudo podman login --username AWS --password-stdin <aws_account_id>.dkr.ecr.<region>.amazonaws.com
```

After you are authenticated, you can tag and push the InstantOn image to the private ECR registry:
```
sudo podman tag dev.local/getting-started-instanton <aws_account_id>.dkr.ecr.<region>.amazonaws.com/getting-started-instanton
sudo podman push <aws_account_id>.dkr.ecr.<region>.amazonaws.com/getting-started-instanton
```

=== Provision the EKS cluster

We are ready to provision an EKS cluster now. The first step is to create a `cluster.yaml` file with the following contents. 

.cluster.yaml
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: eksctl.io/v1alpha5
kind: ClusterConfig

metadata:
  name: instanton
  region: us-east-1
  version: "1.24"

managedNodeGroups:
  - name: ng-instanton
    instanceType: t3.micro
    desiredCapacity: 3
    iam:
       attachPolicyARNs:
          - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEKSWorkerNodePolicy
          - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEKS_CNI_Policy
          - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEC2ContainerRegistryReadOnly
          - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonSSMManagedInstanceCore
----

The initial `cluster.yaml` file requests a Kuberentes v1.24 cluster to be provisioned with three link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/managed-node-groups.html[managed EC2 nodes]. The cluster is just big enough to handle the sample application. If you are planning to deploy other applications to the cluster, adjust the `instanceType` and/or the `desiredCapacity` parameters. Also, make sure that the `region` parameter matches your region. See the link:https://eksctl.io/usage/schema/[config file schema] for additional settings that can be configured when provisioning a cluster.

NOTE: With this configuration, the cluster nodes are created using the default Amazon Machine Image (AMI) running the Amazon Linux 2 operating system. The latest Amazon Linux AMI is running a Linux kernel version that supports InstantOn. The other link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/eks-optimized-amis.html[EKS-optimized AMIs], such as Bottlerocket or Ubuntu 20, also support InstantOn. You can use a custom AMI for your cluster as long as it is running Linux kernel 5.9 or higher. 

After making updates to the `cluster.yaml`, run the following command to provision the EKS cluster:
```
eksctl create cluster -f cluster.yaml
```

After about 15 minutes, the cluster should be provisioned and ready to use. Double check by running the following command to see the cluster nodes:
```
kubectl get node -o wide
```

Look for output similar to the following example:
```
NAME                             STATUS   ROLES    AGE     VERSION               INTERNAL-IP      EXTERNAL-IP      OS-IMAGE         KERNEL-VERSION                  CONTAINER-RUNTIME
ip-xxx-xxx-xx-xxx.ec2.internal   Ready    <none>   2m44s   v1.24.6-eks-4360b32   xxx.xxx.xx.xxx   xx.xxx.xxx.xxx   Amazon Linux 2   5.10.165-143.735.amzn2.x86_64   containerd://1.6.6
ip-xxx-xxx-xx-xxx.ec2.internal   Ready    <none>   2m42s   v1.24.6-eks-4360b32   xxx.xxx.xx.xxx   xx.xx.xx.xx      Amazon Linux 2   5.10.165-143.735.amzn2.x86_64   containerd://1.6.6
```

=== Deploy the InstantOn application

After the cluster is up and running, we can deploy the Liberty InstantOn application. 

First, create a `deployment.yaml` file with the following contents. Update the `image` value to match the `repositoryUri` from the `create-repository` command output.

.deployment.yaml
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: open-liberty-instanton
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app.kubernetes.io/name: open-liberty-instanton
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/name: open-liberty-instanton
    spec:
      containers:
      - image: <aws_account_id>.dkr.ecr.<region>.amazonaws.com/getting-started-instanton
        imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
        name: app
        ports:
        - containerPort: 9080
          name: 9080-tcp
          protocol: TCP
        resources:
          limits:
            cpu: 1
            memory: 512Mi
          requests:
            cpu: 500m
            memory: 256Mi
        securityContext:
          runAsNonRoot: true
          privileged: false
          capabilities:
            add:
            - CHECKPOINT_RESTORE
            - SETPCAP
            drop:
            - ALL
----


Next, deploy the application by running the following command:
```
kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
```

Check the logs to see if the application started up successfully. Keep in mind that it might take a few extra seconds for the pod to start for very first time as the cluster nodes must pull down the container image from ECR:
```
kubectl logs -l app.kubernetes.io/name=open-liberty-instanton --tail=-1
```

Look for the following output to confirm that the application started successfully with InstantOn:
```
[AUDIT   ] CWWKZ0001I: Application io.openliberty.sample.getting.started started in 0.331 seconds.
[AUDIT   ] CWWKC0452I: The Liberty server process resumed operation from a checkpoint in 0.464 seconds.
[AUDIT   ] CWWKF0012I: The server installed the following features: [cdi-2.0, checkpoint-1.0, distributedMap-1.0, jaxrs-2.1, jaxrsClient-2.1, jndi-1.0, json-1.0, jsonp-1.1, monitor-1.0, mpConfig-2.0, mpHealth-3.1, mpMetrics-3.0, servlet-4.0, ssl-1.0].
[AUDIT   ] CWWKF0011I: The defaultServer server is ready to run a smarter planet. The defaultServer server started in 0.510 seconds.
[AUDIT   ] CWWKS4104A: LTPA keys created in 0.919 seconds. LTPA key file: /opt/ol/wlp/output/defaultServer/resources/security/ltpa.keys
[AUDIT   ] CWPKI0803A: SSL certificate created in 3.290 seconds. SSL key file: /opt/ol/wlp/output/defaultServer/resources/security/key.p12
```

Now, you can scale the application up to see how quickly the new pod instances are coming up! Results may vary but you should see up to 90% improvement in the startup time over the same application without InstantOn. 
```
kubectl scale deployment/open-liberty-instanton --replicas=3
```

In a follow on blog post, we will combine InstantOn with link:https://knative.dev/docs/serving/[Knative] and explore the scale-to-zero scenario.

=== Clean up

If you no longer need the EKS cluster, make sure to delete it by running the following command:

```
eksctl delete cluster -f cluster.yaml
```

Similarly, if you no longer need the ECR repository, delete it using the following command:
```
aws ecr delete-repository --repository-name getting-started-instanton --force
```

Commit message:

Fix link to release blog of InstantOn

posts/2023-02-20-aws-instant-on.adoc, after:

---
layout: post
title: "Liberty InstantOn on Amazon EKS"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/jgawor
author_github: https://github.com/jgawor
seo-title: Liberty InstantOn on Amazon EKS - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: Liberty InstantOn dramatically speeds up the startup time of Liberty applications. In this post, we will deploy a simple Liberty application to Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS) and use InstantOn to quickly spin up application containers.
blog_description: Liberty InstantOn dramatically speeds up the startup time of Liberty applications. In this post, we will deploy a simple Liberty application to Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS) and use InstantOn to quickly spin up application containers.
---
= Liberty InstantOn on Amazon EKS
Jarek Gawor <https://github.com/jgawor>

//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

This article was published when the Liberty InstantOn was still beta. Liberty InstantOn has since moved out of beta and is in the Liberty 23.0.0.6 release. See the latest link:/blog/2023/06/29/rapid-startup-instanton.html[Liberty InstantOn] article for the latest information about Liberty InstantOn.

link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2023/02/10/instant-on-beta-update.html[Liberty InstantOn beta] dramatically improves the startup time of Liberty applications. In this post, we will deploy a simple Liberty application to link:https://aws.amazon.com/eks/[Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS)] and use InstantOn to quickly spin up application containers. 

First, we will build an InstantOn container image and push it to link:https://aws.amazon.com/ecr/[Amazon Elastic Container Registry (Amazon ECR)]. Next, we will create a new Amazon EKS cluster, deploy the Liberty application to the cluster, and scale the application up.

To complete the steps outlined in this post, you need the following resources:

* link:https://maven.apache.org/[Maven] to build the Liberty application
* link:https://podman.io/[Podman] to build the InstantOn image
* An link:https://aws.amazon.com/[Amazon AWS] Account
* The link:https://aws.amazon.com/cli/[AWS CLI] to create and manage AWS services
* The link:https://eksctl.io/[Amazon EKS CLI] (v0.120.0 or higher) to create and manage EKS clusters
* The link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl[kubectl] command-line tool to interact with a Kubernetes cluster


== Build the InstantOn image

First, clone the repository of the sample Liberty application. We are checking out the `instanton` branch, which contains the InstantOn modifications. 
```
git clone -b instanton https://github.com/OpenLiberty/sample-getting-started.git
cd sample-getting-started
```

Next, build the application code using Maven:
```
mvn install
```

Once the code is compiled, we can build the InstantOn container image. This process creates two container images:

* The base image, which contains only the application
* The InstantOn image, which extends the base image and adds the checkpoint data needed for a quick startup.  

NOTE: A small set of elevated Linux permissions are required to build the InstantOn container image. However, to simplify the example, the next few commands are run as the `root` user using the `sudo` command.

To build the base image, run:
```
sudo ./build-og.sh
```
The script runs a simple `podman build` command and creates the `dev.local/getting-started` container image.

To build the InstantOn image, run:
```
sudo ./build-instanton.sh
```
The scripts runs a sequence of `podman` commands that create the checkpoint data and save that data in a new `dev.local/getting-started-instanton` container image.

== Push the image to ECR

At this point, the InstantOn image on exists on a local machine. We need to push it to a container registry to make it available to the EKS cluster. One option is to make the image available in a public registry, such as link:https://hub.docker.com/[DockerHub] or link:https://quay.io[Quay]. Another option is to use Amazon ECR. 

In this post, we will use Amazon ECR for a couple of reasons. First, a default private Amazon ECR is provided with each AWS account, so we don't have to set up and configure a separate registry elsewhere. Second, Amazon ECR can seamlessly integrate with EKS and other similar AWS services such as link:https://aws.amazon.com/ecs/[Amazon ECS]. Therefore, we do not have to configure any image pull secrets in our EKS cluster to pull down images from the private container registry.

To use the private Amazon ECR registry, first create a repository for the InstantOn image:
```
aws ecr create-repository --repository-name getting-started-instanton
```

In the output of this command, note the `repositoryUri` value. It should match the `<aws_account_id>.dkr.ecr.<region>.amazonaws.com/getting-started-instanton` pattern. For example: `1234567890.dkr.ecr.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/getting-started-instanton`.  You will need this value when you create the `deployment.yaml` file to deploy the InstantOn application.

Next, authenticate to the registry using the following command so you can push or pull images using Podman:
```
aws ecr get-login-password | sudo podman login --username AWS --password-stdin <aws_account_id>.dkr.ecr.<region>.amazonaws.com
```

After you are authenticated, you can tag and push the InstantOn image to the private ECR registry:
```
sudo podman tag dev.local/getting-started-instanton <aws_account_id>.dkr.ecr.<region>.amazonaws.com/getting-started-instanton
sudo podman push <aws_account_id>.dkr.ecr.<region>.amazonaws.com/getting-started-instanton
```

=== Provision the EKS cluster

We are ready to provision an EKS cluster now. The first step is to create a `cluster.yaml` file with the following contents. 

.cluster.yaml
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: eksctl.io/v1alpha5
kind: ClusterConfig

metadata:
  name: instanton
  region: us-east-1
  version: "1.24"

managedNodeGroups:
  - name: ng-instanton
    instanceType: t3.micro
    desiredCapacity: 3
    iam:
       attachPolicyARNs:
          - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEKSWorkerNodePolicy
          - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEKS_CNI_Policy
          - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEC2ContainerRegistryReadOnly
          - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonSSMManagedInstanceCore
----

The initial `cluster.yaml` file requests a Kuberentes v1.24 cluster to be provisioned with three link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/managed-node-groups.html[managed EC2 nodes]. The cluster is just big enough to handle the sample application. If you are planning to deploy other applications to the cluster, adjust the `instanceType` and/or the `desiredCapacity` parameters. Also, make sure that the `region` parameter matches your region. See the link:https://eksctl.io/usage/schema/[config file schema] for additional settings that can be configured when provisioning a cluster.

NOTE: With this configuration, the cluster nodes are created using the default Amazon Machine Image (AMI) running the Amazon Linux 2 operating system. The latest Amazon Linux AMI is running a Linux kernel version that supports InstantOn. The other link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/eks-optimized-amis.html[EKS-optimized AMIs], such as Bottlerocket or Ubuntu 20, also support InstantOn. You can use a custom AMI for your cluster as long as it is running Linux kernel 5.9 or higher. 

After making updates to the `cluster.yaml`, run the following command to provision the EKS cluster:
```
eksctl create cluster -f cluster.yaml
```

After about 15 minutes, the cluster should be provisioned and ready to use. Double check by running the following command to see the cluster nodes:
```
kubectl get node -o wide
```

Look for output similar to the following example:
```
NAME                             STATUS   ROLES    AGE     VERSION               INTERNAL-IP      EXTERNAL-IP      OS-IMAGE         KERNEL-VERSION                  CONTAINER-RUNTIME
ip-xxx-xxx-xx-xxx.ec2.internal   Ready    <none>   2m44s   v1.24.6-eks-4360b32   xxx.xxx.xx.xxx   xx.xxx.xxx.xxx   Amazon Linux 2   5.10.165-143.735.amzn2.x86_64   containerd://1.6.6
ip-xxx-xxx-xx-xxx.ec2.internal   Ready    <none>   2m42s   v1.24.6-eks-4360b32   xxx.xxx.xx.xxx   xx.xx.xx.xx      Amazon Linux 2   5.10.165-143.735.amzn2.x86_64   containerd://1.6.6
```

=== Deploy the InstantOn application

After the cluster is up and running, we can deploy the Liberty InstantOn application. 

First, create a `deployment.yaml` file with the following contents. Update the `image` value to match the `repositoryUri` from the `create-repository` command output.

.deployment.yaml
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: open-liberty-instanton
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app.kubernetes.io/name: open-liberty-instanton
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/name: open-liberty-instanton
    spec:
      containers:
      - image: <aws_account_id>.dkr.ecr.<region>.amazonaws.com/getting-started-instanton
        imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
        name: app
        ports:
        - containerPort: 9080
          name: 9080-tcp
          protocol: TCP
        resources:
          limits:
            cpu: 1
            memory: 512Mi
          requests:
            cpu: 500m
            memory: 256Mi
        securityContext:
          runAsNonRoot: true
          privileged: false
          capabilities:
            add:
            - CHECKPOINT_RESTORE
            - SETPCAP
            drop:
            - ALL
----


Next, deploy the application by running the following command:
```
kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
```

Check the logs to see if the application started up successfully. Keep in mind that it might take a few extra seconds for the pod to start for very first time as the cluster nodes must pull down the container image from ECR:
```
kubectl logs -l app.kubernetes.io/name=open-liberty-instanton --tail=-1
```

Look for the following output to confirm that the application started successfully with InstantOn:
```
[AUDIT   ] CWWKZ0001I: Application io.openliberty.sample.getting.started started in 0.331 seconds.
[AUDIT   ] CWWKC0452I: The Liberty server process resumed operation from a checkpoint in 0.464 seconds.
[AUDIT   ] CWWKF0012I: The server installed the following features: [cdi-2.0, checkpoint-1.0, distributedMap-1.0, jaxrs-2.1, jaxrsClient-2.1, jndi-1.0, json-1.0, jsonp-1.1, monitor-1.0, mpConfig-2.0, mpHealth-3.1, mpMetrics-3.0, servlet-4.0, ssl-1.0].
[AUDIT   ] CWWKF0011I: The defaultServer server is ready to run a smarter planet. The defaultServer server started in 0.510 seconds.
[AUDIT   ] CWWKS4104A: LTPA keys created in 0.919 seconds. LTPA key file: /opt/ol/wlp/output/defaultServer/resources/security/ltpa.keys
[AUDIT   ] CWPKI0803A: SSL certificate created in 3.290 seconds. SSL key file: /opt/ol/wlp/output/defaultServer/resources/security/key.p12
```

Now, you can scale the application up to see how quickly the new pod instances are coming up! Results may vary but you should see up to 90% improvement in the startup time over the same application without InstantOn. 
```
kubectl scale deployment/open-liberty-instanton --replicas=3
```

In a follow on blog post, we will combine InstantOn with link:https://knative.dev/docs/serving/[Knative] and explore the scale-to-zero scenario.

=== Clean up

If you no longer need the EKS cluster, make sure to delete it by running the following command:

```
eksctl delete cluster -f cluster.yaml
```

Similarly, if you no longer need the ECR repository, delete it using the following command:
```
aws ecr delete-repository --repository-name getting-started-instanton --force
```
