posts/2023-01-03-23.0.0.1-beta.adoc, before:

---
layout: post
title: "Jakarta EE 10 Platform and MicroProfile 6"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/mbroz2
author_github: https://github.com/mbroz2
seo-title: Jakarta EE 10 Platform and MicroProfile 6 - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: "Open Liberty 23.0.0.1-beta offers the same set of beta content as the previous 22.0.0.13-beta release: Jakarta EE Platform 10 and MicroProfile 6. This beta release also includes a way to configure the maximum age for FFDC files and various bug fixes."
blog_description: "Open Liberty 23.0.0.1-beta offers the same set of beta content as the previous 22.0.0.13-beta release: Jakarta EE Platform 10 and MicroProfile 6. This beta release also includes a way to configure the maximum age for FFDC files and various bug fixes."
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---
= Jakarta EE 10 Platform and MicroProfile 6
Michal Broz <https://github.com/mbroz2>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.


Open Liberty 23.0.0.1-beta offers the same set of beta content as the previous 22.0.0.13-beta release: Jakarta EE Platform 10 and MicroProfile 6. To find out more, reference the link:{url-prefix}/blog/2022/12/06/22.0.0.13-beta.html[22.0.0.13-beta blog post]. This beta release also includes a way to configure the maximum age for FFDC files and various bug fixes, which you can learn more about in the link:{url-prefix}/blog/2022/12/20/22.0.0.13.html#bugs[22.0.0.13 release blog post].

See also link:{url-prefix}/blog/?search=beta&key=tag[previous Open Liberty beta blog posts].


[#run]
=== Try it now 

To try out these features, update your build tools to pull the Open Liberty All Beta Features package instead of the main release. The beta works with Java SE 19, Java SE 17, Java SE 11, and Java SE 8.


If you're using link:{url-prefix}/guides/maven-intro.html[Maven], you can install the All Beta Features package using:

[source,xml]
----
<plugin>
    <groupId>io.openliberty.tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>liberty-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>RELEASE</version>
    <configuration>
        <runtimeArtifact>
          <groupId>io.openliberty.beta</groupId>
          <artifactId>openliberty-runtime</artifactId>
          <version>23.0.0.1-beta</version>
          <type>zip</type>
        </runtimeArtifact>
    </configuration>
</plugin>
----

You must also add dependencies to your pom.xml file for the beta version of the APIs that are associated with the beta features that you want to try.  For example, for Jakarta EE 10 and MicroProfile 6, you would include:
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.eclipse.microprofile</groupId>
    <artifactId>microprofile</artifactId>
    <version>6.0-RC3</version>
    <type>pom</type>
    <scope>provided</scope>
</dependency>
<dependency>
    <groupId>jakarta.platform</groupId>
    <artifactId>jakarta.jakartaee-api</artifactId>
    <version>10.0.0</version>
    <scope>provided</scope>
</dependency>
----

Or for link:{url-prefix}/guides/gradle-intro.html[Gradle]:

[source,gradle]
----
dependencies {
    libertyRuntime group: 'io.openliberty.beta', name: 'openliberty-runtime', version: '[23.0.0.1-beta,)'
}
----

Or take a look at our link:{url-prefix}/downloads/#runtime_betas[Downloads page].

For more information on using a beta release, refer to the link:{url-prefix}docs/latest/installing-open-liberty-betas.html[Installing Open Liberty beta releases] documentation.

[#feedback]
== We welcome your feedback

Let us know what you think on link:https://groups.io/g/openliberty[our mailing list]. If you hit a problem, link:https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/open-liberty[post a question on StackOverflow]. If you hit a bug, link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues[please raise an issue].

Commit message:

Add version to title and tags for 23.0.0.1-beta

posts/2023-01-03-23.0.0.1-beta.adoc, after:

---
layout: post
title: "Jakarta EE 10 Platform and MicroProfile 6 in Open Liberty 23.0.0.1-beta"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/mbroz2
author_github: https://github.com/mbroz2
seo-title: Jakarta EE 10 Platform and MicroProfile 6 in Open Liberty 23.0.0.1-beta - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: "Open Liberty 23.0.0.1-beta offers the same set of beta content as the previous 22.0.0.13-beta release: Jakarta EE Platform 10 and MicroProfile 6. This beta release also includes a way to configure the maximum age for FFDC files and various bug fixes."
blog_description: "Open Liberty 23.0.0.1-beta offers the same set of beta content as the previous 22.0.0.13-beta release: Jakarta EE Platform 10 and MicroProfile 6. This beta release also includes a way to configure the maximum age for FFDC files and various bug fixes."
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---
= Jakarta EE 10 Platform and MicroProfile 6 in Open Liberty 23.0.0.1-beta
Michal Broz <https://github.com/mbroz2>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.


Open Liberty 23.0.0.1-beta offers the same set of beta content as the previous 22.0.0.13-beta release: Jakarta EE Platform 10 and MicroProfile 6. To find out more, reference the link:{url-prefix}/blog/2022/12/06/22.0.0.13-beta.html[22.0.0.13-beta blog post]. This beta release also includes a way to configure the maximum age for FFDC files and various bug fixes, which you can learn more about in the link:{url-prefix}/blog/2022/12/20/22.0.0.13.html#bugs[22.0.0.13 release blog post].

See also link:{url-prefix}/blog/?search=beta&key=tag[previous Open Liberty beta blog posts].


[#run]
=== Try it now 

To try out these features, update your build tools to pull the Open Liberty All Beta Features package instead of the main release. The beta works with Java SE 19, Java SE 17, Java SE 11, and Java SE 8.


If you're using link:{url-prefix}/guides/maven-intro.html[Maven], you can install the All Beta Features package using:

[source,xml]
----
<plugin>
    <groupId>io.openliberty.tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>liberty-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>RELEASE</version>
    <configuration>
        <runtimeArtifact>
          <groupId>io.openliberty.beta</groupId>
          <artifactId>openliberty-runtime</artifactId>
          <version>23.0.0.1-beta</version>
          <type>zip</type>
        </runtimeArtifact>
    </configuration>
</plugin>
----

You must also add dependencies to your pom.xml file for the beta version of the APIs that are associated with the beta features that you want to try.  For example, for Jakarta EE 10 and MicroProfile 6, you would include:
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.eclipse.microprofile</groupId>
    <artifactId>microprofile</artifactId>
    <version>6.0-RC3</version>
    <type>pom</type>
    <scope>provided</scope>
</dependency>
<dependency>
    <groupId>jakarta.platform</groupId>
    <artifactId>jakarta.jakartaee-api</artifactId>
    <version>10.0.0</version>
    <scope>provided</scope>
</dependency>
----

Or for link:{url-prefix}/guides/gradle-intro.html[Gradle]:

[source,gradle]
----
dependencies {
    libertyRuntime group: 'io.openliberty.beta', name: 'openliberty-runtime', version: '[23.0.0.1-beta,)'
}
----

Or take a look at our link:{url-prefix}/downloads/#runtime_betas[Downloads page].

For more information on using a beta release, refer to the link:{url-prefix}docs/latest/installing-open-liberty-betas.html[Installing Open Liberty beta releases] documentation.

[#feedback]
== We welcome your feedback

Let us know what you think on link:https://groups.io/g/openliberty[our mailing list]. If you hit a problem, link:https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/open-liberty[post a question on StackOverflow]. If you hit a bug, link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues[please raise an issue].
