posts/2024-01-30-24.0.0.1.adoc, before:

---
layout: post
title: "Expanded InstantOn support in Open Liberty 24.0.0.1"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/dmuelle
author_github: https://github.com/dmuelle
seo-title: Expanded InstantOn support in Open Liberty 24.0.0.1 - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: InstantOn now supports features that enable Jakarta and Java XML Web Services and Jakarta and Java Mail functions, as well as more versions of previously supported features. This release also introduces the option to verify the authenticity of the Open Liberty public key.
blog_description: InstantOn now supports features that enable Jakarta and Java XML Web Services and Jakarta and Java Mail functions, as well as more versions of previously supported features. This release also introduces the option to verify the authenticity of the Open Liberty public key.
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---
= Expanded InstantOn support in Open Liberty 24.0.0.1
David Mueller <https://github.com/dmuelle>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

The 24.0.0.1 release expands the set of Liberty features that Liberty InstantOn supports. InstantOn now supports features that enable Jakarta and Java XML Web Services and Jakarta and Java Mail functions, and more versions of previously supported features. This release also introduces the option to verify the authenticity of the Open Liberty public key.


In link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 24.0.0.1:

* <<instanton_features, InstantOn support for Jakarta XML Web Services, Java Web Services and other features>>

* <<verify_key, Verify the authenticity of the Open Liberty public key>>

View the list of fixed bugs in link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues?q=label%3Arelease%3A24001+label%3A%22release+bug%22[24.0.0.1].

For a list of past security vulnerability fixes, reference the link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/security-vulnerabilities.html[Security vulnerability (CVE) list].

Check out link:{url-prefix}/blog/?search=release&search!=beta[previous Open Liberty GA release blog posts].


[#run]

== Develop and run your apps by using 24.0.0.1

If you're using link:{url-prefix}/guides/maven-intro.html[Maven], include the following code in your `pom.xml` file:

[source,xml]
----
<plugin>
    <groupId>io.openliberty.tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>liberty-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>3.10</version>
</plugin>
----

Or for link:{url-prefix}/guides/gradle-intro.html[Gradle], include the following in your `build.gradle` file:

[source,gradle]
----
buildscript {
    repositories {
        mavenCentral()
    }
    dependencies {
        classpath 'io.openliberty.tools:liberty-gradle-plugin:3.8'
    }
}
apply plugin: 'liberty'
----

Or if you're using link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/container-images.html[container images]:

[source]
----
FROM icr.io/appcafe/open-liberty
----

Or take a look at our link:{url-prefix}/start/[Downloads page].

If you're using link:https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/14856-liberty-tools[IntelliJ IDEA], link:https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Open-Liberty.liberty-dev-vscode-ext[Visual Studio Code] or link:https://marketplace.eclipse.org/content/liberty-tools[Eclipse IDE], you can also take advantage of our open source link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/develop-liberty-tools.html[Liberty developer tools] to enable effective development, testing, debugging, and application management all from within your IDE.

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/27303
// Contact/Reviewer: anjumfatima90
// // // // // // // //
[#instanton_features]
== InstantOn support for Jakarta XML Web Services, Java Web Services and other features

Open Liberty InstantOn provides fast startup times for MicroProfile and Jakarta EE applications.

InstantOn supports link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/instanton.html#supported-features[a subset of Open Liberty features]. As of the 24.0.0.1 release, the following features are enhanced to support InstantOn, in addition to the set of features included in the link:{url-prefix}/blog/2023/06/27/23.0.0.6.html[initial Liberty InstantOn release]:


|===
| Feature name | Short name | Initial InstantOn support

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/jaxws-2.2.html[Java Web Services 2.2]
| `jaxws-2.2`
| 24.0.0.1 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/xmlWS-3.0.html[Jakarta XML Web Services 3.0]
| `xmlWS-3.0`
| 24.0.0.1 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/xmlWS-4.0.html[Jakarta XML Web Services 4.0]
| `xmlWS-4.0`
| 24.0.0.1 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/jdbc-4.1.html[Java Database Connectivity 4.1]
| `jdbc-4.1`
| 23.0.0.9 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/jdbc-4.3.html[Java Database Connectivity 4.3]
| `jdbc-4.3`
| 23.0.0.9 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/appSecurity-1.0.html[Application Security 1.0]
| `appSecurity-1.0`
| 23.0.0.10 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/javaMail-1.6.html[Java Mail 1.6]
| `javaMail-1.6`
| 23.0.0.10 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/mail-2.0.html[Jakarta Mail 2.0]
| `mail-2.0`
| 23.0.0.10 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/mail-2.1.html[Jakarta Mail 2.1]
| `mail-2.1`
| 23.0.0.10 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/passwordUtilities-1.0.html[Password Utilities 1.0]
| `passwordUtilities-1.0`
| 23.0.0.10 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/localConnector-1.0.html[Admin Local Connector 1.0]
| `localConnector-1.0`
| 23.0.0.11 and later
|===

This enhancement enables you to rapidly deploy applications that use these features by using Open Liberty InstantOn. For more information, see link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/instanton.html[Faster startup for containerized applications with Open Liberty InstantOn].

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>

[#verify_key]
== Verify the authenticity of the Open Liberty public key

The Open Liberty project uses its private key to digitally sign each Open Liberty release. You can use the Open Liberty public key to check the signature, verify that the package was released by Open Liberty, and that it was not modified since its release. Starting in version 24.0.0.1, you can also verify the authenticity of the Liberty public key by using a provided certificate (`.cer`) file. For more information, see link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/verifying-package-signatures.html[Verifying Open Liberty release package signatures].


== Get Open Liberty 24.0.0.1 now

Available through <<run,Maven, Gradle, Docker, and as a downloadable archive>>.

[link=https://stackoverflow.com/tags/open-liberty]
image::img/blog/blog_btn_stack.svg[Ask a question on Stack Overflow, align="center"]

Commit message:

add tags and release post link for ubi9min images

posts/2024-01-30-24.0.0.1.adoc, after:

---
layout: post
title: "Expanded InstantOn support in Open Liberty 24.0.0.1"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/dmuelle
author_github: https://github.com/dmuelle
seo-title: Expanded InstantOn support in Open Liberty 24.0.0.1 - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: InstantOn now supports features that enable Jakarta and Java XML Web Services and Jakarta and Java Mail functions, as well as more versions of previously supported features. This release also introduces Java 21 container images and the option to verify the authenticity of the Open Liberty public key.
blog_description: InstantOn now supports features that enable Jakarta and Java XML Web Services and Jakarta and Java Mail functions, as well as more versions of previously supported features. This release also introduces Java 21 container images and the option to verify the authenticity of the Open Liberty public key.
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---
= Expanded InstantOn support in Open Liberty 24.0.0.1
David Mueller <https://github.com/dmuelle>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

The 24.0.0.1 release expands the set of Liberty features that Liberty InstantOn supports. InstantOn now supports features that enable Jakarta and Java XML Web Services and Jakarta and Java Mail functions, and more versions of previously supported features. This release also introduces Java 21 container images and the option to verify the authenticity of the Open Liberty public key.


In link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 24.0.0.1:

* <<instanton_features, InstantOn support for Jakarta XML Web Services, Java Web Services and other features>>

* <<verify_key, Verify the authenticity of the Open Liberty public key>>

View the list of fixed bugs in link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues?q=label%3Arelease%3A24001+label%3A%22release+bug%22[24.0.0.1].

For a list of past security vulnerability fixes, reference the link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/security-vulnerabilities.html[Security vulnerability (CVE) list].

Check out link:{url-prefix}/blog/?search=release&search!=beta[previous Open Liberty GA release blog posts].


[#run]

== Develop and run your apps by using 24.0.0.1

If you're using link:{url-prefix}/guides/maven-intro.html[Maven], include the following code in your `pom.xml` file:

[source,xml]
----
<plugin>
    <groupId>io.openliberty.tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>liberty-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>3.10</version>
</plugin>
----

Or for link:{url-prefix}/guides/gradle-intro.html[Gradle], include the following in your `build.gradle` file:

[source,gradle]
----
buildscript {
    repositories {
        mavenCentral()
    }
    dependencies {
        classpath 'io.openliberty.tools:liberty-gradle-plugin:3.8'
    }
}
apply plugin: 'liberty'
----

Or if you're using link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/container-images.html[container images]:

[source]
----
FROM icr.io/appcafe/open-liberty
----

Or take a look at our link:{url-prefix}/start/[Downloads page].

If you're using link:https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/14856-liberty-tools[IntelliJ IDEA], link:https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Open-Liberty.liberty-dev-vscode-ext[Visual Studio Code] or link:https://marketplace.eclipse.org/content/liberty-tools[Eclipse IDE], you can also take advantage of our open source link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/develop-liberty-tools.html[Liberty developer tools] to enable effective development, testing, debugging, and application management all from within your IDE.


== New container images for Java 21

Starting in 24.0.0.1, you can pull Open Liberty container images that use Java 21 from IBM Container Registry. The images are available in either `full` or `kernel-slim` image types and are based on Universal Base Image (UBI) 9 minimal. They include the IBM Semeru Runtimes for Java 21 Java runtime environment (JRE). For more information, see link:{url-prefix}/2024/02/05/Java21-Images.html[UBI 9 minimal Liberty container images with Semeru Runtime Java 21 support].


// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/27303
// Contact/Reviewer: anjumfatima90
// // // // // // // //
[#instanton_features]
== InstantOn support for Jakarta XML Web Services, Java Web Services and other features

Open Liberty InstantOn provides fast startup times for MicroProfile and Jakarta EE applications.

InstantOn supports link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/instanton.html#supported-features[a subset of Open Liberty features]. As of the 24.0.0.1 release, the following features are enhanced to support InstantOn, in addition to the set of features included in the link:{url-prefix}/blog/2023/06/27/23.0.0.6.html[initial Liberty InstantOn release]:


|===
| Feature name | Short name | Initial InstantOn support

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/jaxws-2.2.html[Java Web Services 2.2]
| `jaxws-2.2`
| 24.0.0.1 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/xmlWS-3.0.html[Jakarta XML Web Services 3.0]
| `xmlWS-3.0`
| 24.0.0.1 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/xmlWS-4.0.html[Jakarta XML Web Services 4.0]
| `xmlWS-4.0`
| 24.0.0.1 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/jdbc-4.1.html[Java Database Connectivity 4.1]
| `jdbc-4.1`
| 23.0.0.9 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/jdbc-4.3.html[Java Database Connectivity 4.3]
| `jdbc-4.3`
| 23.0.0.9 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/appSecurity-1.0.html[Application Security 1.0]
| `appSecurity-1.0`
| 23.0.0.10 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/javaMail-1.6.html[Java Mail 1.6]
| `javaMail-1.6`
| 23.0.0.10 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/mail-2.0.html[Jakarta Mail 2.0]
| `mail-2.0`
| 23.0.0.10 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/mail-2.1.html[Jakarta Mail 2.1]
| `mail-2.1`
| 23.0.0.10 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/passwordUtilities-1.0.html[Password Utilities 1.0]
| `passwordUtilities-1.0`
| 23.0.0.10 and later

| link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/localConnector-1.0.html[Admin Local Connector 1.0]
| `localConnector-1.0`
| 23.0.0.11 and later
|===

This enhancement enables you to rapidly deploy applications that use these features by using Open Liberty InstantOn. For more information, see link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/instanton.html[Faster startup for containerized applications with Open Liberty InstantOn].

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>

[#verify_key]
== Verify the authenticity of the Open Liberty public key

The Open Liberty project uses its private key to digitally sign each Open Liberty release. You can use the Open Liberty public key to check the signature, verify that the package was released by Open Liberty, and that it was not modified since its release. Starting in version 24.0.0.1, you can also verify the authenticity of the Liberty public key by using a provided certificate (`.cer`) file. For more information, see link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/verifying-package-signatures.html[Verifying Open Liberty release package signatures].


== Get Open Liberty 24.0.0.1 now

Available through <<run,Maven, Gradle, Docker, and as a downloadable archive>>.

[link=https://stackoverflow.com/tags/open-liberty]
image::img/blog/blog_btn_stack.svg[Ask a question on Stack Overflow, align="center"]
